[OSDOCS-19329]: Networking overview for HCP (#110711)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/hcp-networking-overview.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * hosted_control_planes/hcp-networking.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="hcp-networking-overview_{context}"]
= Networking overview for {hcp}

[role="_abstract"]
Proper network design can ensure the performance, automation, and security of {hcp}. Your network configuration depends on the provider that you use, such as bare metal on the Agent platform or {VirtProductName}, and the segmentation that you need.

> For example, for {hcp} on {VirtProductName}, you can create `NodePool` virtual machines (VMs) with different network configurations, including using the pod network, bridging an external network into the VMs, and using a user-defined network (UDN) that uses localnet topology. Network latency and throughput are important factors to ensure control-plane communication, workload traffic, and storage access. The use of dedicated physical network adapters can ensure adequate throughput and low latency for all components.

Reviewer: I'd like to double-check UDN support in this context, likely supported if transparent for HCP but I know we have some testing to do in some areas for UDN.

Author: @racedo Would it be best if I removed the reference to UDN for now?

Reviewer: Yes, while UDN may work let's add it back when it's formally supported.

[id="hcp-networking-considerations_{context}"]
== Control plane and data plane networking considerations

When you consider your networking configuration for {hcp}, remember the structure of the control plane and data plane:

Control plane:: The control plane includes pods that run on the management cluster in a dedicated namespace. The pods expose the hosted control plane `kube-apiserver` component, OAuth, Ignition server, and Konnectivity service. Hosted cluster nodes access those services through the data plane network, so the services must be reachable from the data plane network, even if a firewall is in place.
+
The management cluster hosts different control planes, and their services are exposed through its network. Network segmentation by API is not currently supported.

> Data plane:: The data plane includes compute nodes that are represented by bare-metal servers or VMs that are hosted on {VirtProductName}. The data plane has a minimum of 2 nodes, and hosts default ingress controller and user applications.

Reviewer 2: We mention only bare-metal serveres and VMs that are hosted on OpenShift Virtualization. But, we also support cloud providers such as AWS. We mention these two variants further below without mentioning cloud providers. Is this expected? It sounds incomplete.
This whole section is general: "Networking for hosted control planes" . So, we should probably also mention AWS or avoid mentioning just "bare metal" and KubeVirt.

Author: @mgencur Good point. To provide some background, this documentation resulted from discussions in the docs hackathon in April, where the focus was on bare metal and OpenShift Virtualization since those are the two platforms that customers use the most. What if I reworded this section as follows, so that the bare metal and KubeVirt content is mentioned as examples?

```suggestion
Data plane:: The data plane has a minimum of 2 compute nodes, and it hosts the default ingress controller and user applications. For example, depending on the platform you use, the data plane includes compute nodes that are represented by bare-metal servers or VMs that are hosted on {VirtProductName}. 
```

Reviewer: The data plane of hosted clusters can run on nodes from any provider (as documented) and on VMs of OpenShift Virtualization as well as VMs from other supported virtualization platforms via the non-bare metal agent (currently in TP) so if the intention is to cover this in general we must open this to all supported variants.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * hosted_control_planes/hcp-networking.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="hcp-networking-overview_{context}"]
= Networking overview for {hcp}

[role="_abstract"]

> Proper network design can ensure the performance, automation, and security of {hcp}. Your network configuration depends on the segmentation that you need and  the provider that you use, such as a cloud provider, bare metal on the Agent platform, or {VirtProductName}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Proper network design can ensure the performance, automation, and security of {hcp}. Your network configuration depends on the segmentation that you need and the provider that you use, such as a cloud provider, bare metal on the Agent platform, or {VirtProductName}.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * hosted_control_planes/hcp-networking.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="hcp-networking-overview_{context}"]
= Networking overview for {hcp}

[role="_abstract"]
Proper network design can ensure the performance, automation, and security of {hcp}. Your network configuration depends on the provider that you use, such as bare metal on the Agent platform or {VirtProductName}, and the segmentation that you need.

> For example, for {hcp} on {VirtProductName}, you can create `NodePool` virtual machines (VMs) with different network configurations, including pod networks, bridges, and overlay networks. Network latency and throughput are important factors to provide high-performance networking to ensure control-plane communication, workload traffic, and storage access. The use of dedicated physical network adapters can ensure adequate throughput and low latency for all components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, for {hcp} on {VirtProductName}, you can create `NodePool` virtual machines (VMs) with different network configurations, including using the pod network, bridging an external network into the VMs, and using overlay user-defined networks. Network latency and throughput are important factors to provide high-performance networking to ensure control-plane communication, workload traffic, and storage access. The use of dedicated physical network adapters can ensure adequate throughput and low latency for all components.
```

Author: Revised according to your suggestion

Reviewer 5: With https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/OCPBUGS-84145 we added a clear supported statement about: `using overlay user-defined networks. ` Only topology localnet is supported.

I would suggest to write:
```
VMs, and using a user-defined network (UDN) that uses the localnet topology.
```

It's basically the same as what we wrote on https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/110772

Author: Updated. Thanks, Robert!

[id="hcp-networking-considerations_{context}"]
== Control plane and data plane networking considerations

When you consider your networking configuration for {hcp}, remember the structure of the control plane and data plane:

> Control plane:: The control plane includes pods that run on the management cluster in a dedicated namespace. The pods expose the cluster API, cluster OAuth, Ignition server, and Konnectivity service. OpenShift users can access those services from the data plane, and that access can be filtered by a firewall.

Reviewer 5: > cluster OAuth
I would just call it `OAuth`, without the cluster. 

> OpenShift users can access those services from the data plane, and that access can be filtered by a firewall.

What do you want to tell the reader of the docs?

Reviewer 4: Maybe that those services must be accessible from data plane network, even when access can be restricted through a firewall? I agree we may need to clarify this a bit.

Reviewer 4: I'd also replace "cluster API" with "hosted control plane kube-apiserver". Cluster API can be confused with the component that deploys the hosted cluster VMs (which is named cluster API).

Author: Good suggestions. I removed "cluster" and revised the last sentence on line 19.

Author: Replaced "cluster API" with "hosted control plane kube-apiserver". Good catch!

+

> Different control planes are hosted on the management cluster, and their services are exposed through MetalLB or an external load balancer on the same network. Network segmentation by API is not supported.

Reviewer 4: MetalLB is not the only `LoadBalancer` service provider, we must give room to others. There are even other ways to expose the hosted control planes (like node port). So in order to not overload this paragraph at just the introduction, maybe you should just do a change like this:

```suggestion
Different control planes are hosted on the management cluster, and their services are exposed through its network. Network segmentation by API is not currently supported.
```

Author: Done

> Data plane:: The data plane includes compute nodes that are represented by bare-metal servers or VMs that are hosted on {VirtProductName}. The data plane has a minimum of 2 nodes, and hosts default ingress and user applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data plane:: The data plane includes compute nodes that are represented by bare-metal servers or VMs that are hosted on {VirtProductName}. The data plane has a minimum of 2 nodes, and hosts default ingress controller and user applications.
```

Author: Fixed

+

> For {VirtProductName}, you can host different data planes on the management cluster. For bare-metal servers or an external {VirtProductName} cluster, you can host data planes by external infrastructure. Some VLAN-based network segmentation is possible if all of the configured VLANs can route traffic to the endpoints of the API.

Reviewer 5: > if all of the configured VLANs can route traffic to the endpoints of the API.

Not only API.

* Nodes need access to the API, OAuth, Ignition server, and Konnectivity service.
* OpenShift users of the hosted cluster need access to API & OAuth

Reviewer 4: In addition that the comment of OCP virt being able to host many clusters on the management cluster assumes that we are using the local OCP cluster for the VMs. Although not typical, it is also possible to have the OCP virt VMs in an external OCP cluster instead of the local management cluster.

Author: Added those details ✔️

+

> The node pools in hosted clusters on the data plane depend on the components that run on the control plane, such as Konnectivity, Ignition, and OAuth. By default, those components are installed by using a `Route` endpoint publishing strategy, and they are admitted on the default ingress controller, which is often installed on primary networks from the management cluster. To segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

Author: Note for technical reviewers: I plan to add a reference to the networking segmentation docs here when they're ready.

> The node pools in hosted clusters on the data plane depend on the components that run on the control plane, such as Konnectivity, Ignition, and OAuth. By default, those components are installed by using a `Route` endpoint publishing strategy, and they are admitted on the default ingress controller, which is often installed on primary networks from the management cluster. To segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

Reviewer 5: > To segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

Is it the case it's not supported at all? @racedo @celebdor

Author: This text came directly from the draft documentation for use case 1: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rppJ2AbIs_mkRIEmFoeqrbAjkCBACvLn5CzG3tUejn8/edit?tab=t.lrb923dswvvx

I'm happy to change the text here if it's not quite right. I'll wait for responses from Ramon and Toni.

Reviewer: We support secondary networks. E.g e2e for KubeVirt: https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/main/test/e2e/nodepool_kv_advanced_multinet_test.go

Author: Noted. I'm removing the line about that configuration not being supported. Thanks!

Reviewer 5: > To segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

We have two topics:
- Place worker VMs (via NodePool) into another network. Which is supported and works like a charm.
- Placing the hosted control plane components (API,Konnectivity,oauth,ignition) into another network is not still not clear to me. We discussed QE coverage & so on here: https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/C0AMZ2QQU2C/p1777893325328799

Author: I removed the line about network segmentation not being supported. After this high-level overview is approved and merged, I plan to work on the more detailed doc about network segmentation, where I will mention this.

> .Example network configuration options by cluster type

Author: Note for technical reviewers: If you have a better suggestion for this table title, let me know.

Reviewer 4: We cannot choose the service IPs for the hosted clusters, so this is not something we configure (and it would look more realistic if the IPs were a bit randomized).

In addition, even if in the same network, it would work best if the management cluster ingress IP was different from the API one (which is most typical) and if the column names were like "Kubernetes API IP", "Default ingress IP",...

Reviewer 4: But apart from that. What would be the goal of this table?

Author: @palonsoro Based on the draft documentation from the hackathon [1], I think the goal of the table is to give users an idea of what some example IP addresses might be for the various HCP components. Based on the comments in this PR, however, it looks like it might be causing more confusion than help. I can remove it altogether if it isn't helping.

[1] https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rppJ2AbIs_mkRIEmFoeqrbAjkCBACvLn5CzG3tUejn8/edit?tab=t.lrb923dswvvx

[cols="4",options="header"]
|===
|Cluster type |API |Hosted cluster ingress |Host network

|Management cluster
|172.30.10.1
|172.30.10.1
|172.30.10.0/24

|Hosted cluster 01
|172.30.10.100

> |172.30.11.1

Reviewer 5: I would prefer a completely different private network like: 
* `10.1.0.0/24` for Hosted cluster 01
* `10.2.0.0/24` for Hosted cluster 02

You have to look twice to see the difference between `172.30.10.0/24` vs `172.30.11.0/24` vs `172.30.12.0/24`

Reviewer 4: I agree. In addition, `172.30.0.0/16` is the default Kubernetes service IP network (i.e. all the Kubernetes services inside a cluster with default config have their IPs starting with 172.16), so if these are host IPs, we are going to confuse a lot of people.

Author: @rbo Good suggestion. PTAL at the updated examples and let me know if anything doesn't make sense.

|Hosted cluster 02
|172.30.10.101
|172.30.12.1
|172.30.12.0/24

|Hosted cluster x
|172.30.10.x
|x.x.x.x
|x.x.x.x

|===

The node pools on the data plane depend on the components that run on the control plane, such as Konnectivity, Ignition, and OAuth. By default, those components are installed by using a `Route` endpoint publishing strategy, and they are admitted on the default ingress controller, which is often installed on primary networks from the management cluster. In order to segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

[id="hcp-networking-dhcp_{context}"]
== DHCP requirements for {hcp}

The requirements for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) differ depending on your platform provider:

> * For bare-metal providers, dynamic and manual IP segmentation are possible, so a DHCP server is not mandatory.

Author: ignoring this warning, as "bare-metal" is being used properly here as a hyphenated modifier of "providers"

> * For bare metal providers, you can use dynamic or manual IP segmentation, so a DHCP server is not mandatory.

Reviewer 4: We should somehow clarify that we require the same node to be always given the same IP.

Author: I added a second sentence to this line to state that a node must always be given the same IP address.

** All of the configured VLANs can route traffic to the endpoints of the API, OAuth, Ignition server, and Konnectivity service.
** Hosted cluster users can access the API and OAuth.

+
The node pools in hosted clusters on the data plane depend on the components that run on the control plane, such as Konnectivity, Ignition, and OAuth. By default, those components are installed by using a `Route` endpoint publishing strategy, and they are admitted on the default ingress controller, which is often installed on primary networks from the management cluster. To segment this implementation on a secondary network, you must change several network flows between the control plane and the data plane. That configuration is not supported or recommended.

.Example network configuration options by cluster type
[cols="4",options="header"]
|===
|Cluster type |API |Hosted cluster ingress |Host network

|Management cluster
|172.30.10.1
|172.30.10.1
|172.30.10.0/24

> 

Reviewer 4: Please let's avoid `172.30.x.x` completely. It is by default used for service networks, so users will get confused.

Author: @palonsoro Do you have a suggestion for a reasonable alternative? I'd rather not just make up a number.

Author: Nevermind. I'm removing the table -- at least for now -- as it doesn't seem to be helping.

Reviewer 4: Ok.

|Hosted cluster 01

> |10.1.0.0

Reviewer 4: API will either be on a node port or LoadBalancer service on the management cluster. This means that it is most likely that the API IPs are in same subnet than management cluster host network.
